## Ælfric's Life of St. Edmund - Vol. 2

### First part (in class; ll. 158-180)

Then soon afterwards he [Hinguar, the Danish invader] sent a boastful message to the king; [the message said] that he had to yield to his tribute if he cared about his life. Then the messenger arrived to king Edmund and quickly announced Hinguar's message to him: 'Hinguar our king, bold and victorious on sea and on land, has dominion of many peoples, and now suddenly arrives here, to the lans, with an army, so that he may have winter quarters here, with his company. Now he commands that you quickly share your secret gold hoards and the wealth of your elders with him, and that you may be his underking, if you want to be alive, because you do not have the might [with] which you can withstand him.'

What! King Edmund called one bishop who was then the nearest to him, and with him [he] considered how he had to answer to the cruel Hinguar. Then the bishop feared for the sudden occurrence and for the life of the king, and said that it seemed advisable to him that he submit to what Hinguar commanded to him. Then the king fell silent and looked to the earth and then said, at last, regally, to him 'Oh lo, you bishop, the wretched people of the land are harassed to scorn, and now it were preferable to me that I should fell in fighting, provided that my people might be allowed to benefit from their home'; and the bishop said, 'Oh lo, you dear king, your people lies slain and you do not have your support [with] which you may fight, and the boat men come, and bind you alive, unless you protect your life with flight, or you similarly protect yourself because you submit to him.'

### Second part (at home; ll. 180-217)

Then Edmund the king, just as he was very bold, said, 'I desire this, and wish [it] with my spirit, that I alone do not survive after my dear thanes, who would be suddenly slain, in their beds, with children and wives, by these boat men. It is never customary for me that I took flight, and I would rather die for my own home, if I needed [to]; and the almighty God knows that I will not ever desist from his practices, nor from his true love, [whether] I die, [or] I live.'

After these words he returned to the messenger whom Hinguar sent to him and said to him unafraid, 'Certainly you were worthy of slaughter now, but I will not defile my clean hands in your foul blood, because I follow Christ, he who thus set an example for us; and I will gladly be slain by you [all], if God pre-ordained it so. Now, travel very quickly and say to your cruel lord, "Never in [his] life will Edmund bind to Hinguar, a pagan leader, unless he first submits to Christ the Savior, with faith, in this land."'

Then the messenger quickly went away, and met the fierce Hinguar on the way, with all his army, eager to [reach] Edmund, and said to the dishonorable [one] how he was answered. Then Hinguar commanded with arrogance to the fleet that they had to seize everything of this one king, who rejected his command, and soon bind him. What! Then King Edmund, when Hinguar came, stood in his hall, mindful of the Savior, and threw his weapon away: he wanted to imitate the example of Christ, who forbade Peter to fight with weapons against the fierce Jews. What! Then the dishonorable [ones] bound Edmund, and mocked [him] shamefully, and beat him with cudgels, and thus led the devout king, afterwards, to one tree fastened to the earth, and tied him there, with hard bonds, and after [that they] beat him longly with whips; and always, between the blows, he called with true faith on Christ the Savior; and then the pagans for his faith became furiously angry, because he called Christ to help him. Then they shot him with spears too, as if [it was] their game, until he was all covered with their shootings, just as Sebastian was. Then Hinguar, the dishonorable boat man, saw that the noble king did not want to forsake Christ, but with resolute faith called him ever: then [he] ordered [that they] behead him, and the pagans did so.
