# Ælfric's Life of St. Edmund - Part 3 (ll. 217-250)

Between these he who called on Christ still [did], then the heathens took the holy [one] to [the] slaughter, and with one blow struck him off the head, and his soul, blessed, traveled to Christ. Some man was there, nearby, maintained concealed to the heathens through God, who heard all this and after said it just as we say it here.

What! Then, afterwards, the sea army fared to the ship, and hid the head of the holy Edmund in the thick brambles so that it would not [be] buried. Then, after [some] time, after they had departed, the land-folk, who was then left there, arrived to [that place] where the body of their leader lay without [his] head, and turned into [a] very sorrowful mood for his slaughter, and especially since they did not have the head for the body. Then the observer, who had seen it before, said that the boat-men had the head with them, and it seemed to him, just as it was very true, that they hid the head in the forest somewhere.

Then they all went together to the wood, seeking everywhere, through bushes and brambles, if anywhere they might encounter that head. It was also much wonder that a wolf was sent through God's guidance, to protect that head against the other wild animals, during day and night. Then they went seeking, and always calling, just as it is custom for those who often go in the wood, 'Where are you now, mate?,' and to them answered the head, 'Here! Here! Here!,' and so called frequently, answering to them all as often as any of them called, until they all arrived, through the callings, to him. Then the gray wolf, who guarded the head, lay [there], and with his two feet had clasped the head, greedy and hungry, and for God he dared not taste of the head, but held it against [the] wild animals. Then they were astonished by the wolf's guardianship, and carried the holy head home with them, being grateful to the Almighty of all his wonders; but the wolf followed forth with the head, until they arrived to [the] town, as [if] he were tame, and afterwards went back again, to the wood. Then, afterwards, the land-men laid the head next to the holy body, and buried him just as well as they might in such haste, and soon raised a church upon him.
