# Ælfric's Life of St. Edmund - Vol. 4

## Part I (ll. 251-282)

Then, again, in a space of time, after many years, when the ravaging ceased and peace was given to the harassed folk, then they joined together and splendidly made one church for the holy [one], because frequent wonders happened at his burial place, in the chapel where he was buried. Then they wished to carry the holy body, with public honor, and lay [it] inside that church. Then [there] was great wonder that he was just as whole as if he were alive, with a clean body, and his neck, which was cut through before, was healed, and [there] was like a silken thread, red, around his neck, evidence to the people [of] how he was slain. Likewise, besides, the wounds that the fierce pagans made on his body with frequent shootings, were healed through the heavenly God; and thus he lies, sound, until the present day, waiting for resurrection and the eternal glory. His body, which lies undecayed, reveals to us that he lived here in the world without fornication, and with a clean life journeyed to Christ.

Some widow, named Oswyn, dwelt at the burial place in prayer and fasting, many year afterwards, [and] that [one] wished to cut [the hair of] the saint each year, and trim his nails neatly, with love, and to hold [them] in a chest, for relics, in the altar.

Then the land-folk honored the saint with faith, and Theodred the bishop solemnly endowed that monastery with gifts in gold and in silver, to give honor to the saint. Then, on some occasion, eight unhappy thieves arrived to the honorable and holy [one] on one night: they wished to steal the treasures that men had brought there, and [they] tested with craft how they might get in. Some struck the hasps mightily with a sledge [hammer], some of them with files filed around, some also dug under the door with spades, some of them with a ladder wished to unlock the window, but they labored in vain and miserably fared thus, [in] that the holy man bound them miraculously, each [one of them], so [that] he stood struggling with a tool, [and in] that none of them might accomplish that crime, nor [might] they stir thence, but stood thus until morning.  

## Part II (ll. 282-316)

Then men wondered at this -- how the criminals hung, some on the ladder, some bent to dig, and each was fast bound in his work. Then they were all carried to the bishop and he ordered that they all hang on high gallows, but he was not at all mindful of how God, the mild-hearted, spoke through his prophet the words that stand here: _eos qui ducuntur ad mortem euere ne cesses_, 'those who lead a man to death, always leave them out'; and the holy canons too forbid to those [who are] ordained, both bishops and priests, to be [_thus_] about thieves, because it does not befit them who are chosen for serving God, that they must concur in the death of any man, if they are servants of the Lord. Afterwards, when the bishop Theodred looked again [at] his book, [he] repented with sadness that he [had] assigned such a cruel doom to those unhappy thieves, and always regretted it until the end of his life, and he eagerly asked the people that they fast with him fully, for three days, asking the Almighty that he had to spare him.

In that land [there] was some man, called Leofstan, powerful for [the] world and ignorant for God. He rode to the [holy] one with much arrogance, and insolently ordered that they showed to him the holy saint, whether he was unharmed; but as soon as he saw the body of the saint, he then immediately went mad and raged horribly and miserably ended to an evil dead. This is for him like what the faithful Pope Gregorius said in his account about the holy Laurentius, who lies in the city of Rome -- that men always wished to see how he lay, both good and evil; but God stopped them, so [_that_ they] died there, in the showing, a [group of] seven men together. Then the others ceased to show the martyr with human heresy.

We heard many wonders in popular speech about the holy Edmund, which we do not wish to set in writing here, but everyone knew them. In this holy [man] is clear, and in other similar [ones], that the Almighty God may raise the man again, in doomsday, uncorrupted, from the earth, he who holds his body whole, for Edmund, until the great day, although he [_who_] came from the earth. The place is worthy for the venerable, holy [one], that they may honor the man and arrange well for [the] service of Christ, with clean servants of God, because the holy [one] is more famous than men may imagine.

### Part III (The conclusion)

England is not deprived of saints of the Lord, when in English land lie such saints as this holy king, and the blessed Cuthbert, and Audrey in Ely, and her sister too, uncorrupted in body, to confirm [her] faith. [There] are also many other holy [ones] in England who work many miracles (just as it is widely known) for love to the Almighty, in whom they believed. Christ makes clear to men through his famous saints that he is the Almighty God who makes such wonders, despite that the wretched Jews abandoned him entirely, because they are cursed, such as they desired themselves. [There] are not any wonders made at their graves, because they do not believe in the living Christ, but Christ makes clear to men where the true faith is, whenever he works such wonders through his holy [ones], widely throughout the earth. May the glory of this always be to him, and with his heavenly Father and the Holy Ghost. Amen.
