## The Dream of the Rood (ll. 1-77)

What! I wish to say the best of dreams, what dream happened to me in the middle [of the] night, after the speech-bearers went to rest. It seemed to me that I saw a rarer tree lifted into the air, wound in light, the brightest of beams. All that beacon was covered with gold; fair gems stood at the surface of the earth, [and] likewise there were five up in the crossbeam. All the [ones made] fair through eternal creation beheld there the angel of the Lord; certainly [it] was not a gallows of the wicked there, but there beheld it holy spirits, men over the earth, and all this illustrious creation. [It] was marvelous, the tree of creation, and I--stained with sins, severely wounded with iniquities. I saw the tree of glory shine with joys, exalted with coverings, girded with gold; gems had covered splendidly the tree of the Ruler.

However, through that gold, I could perceive the ancient hostility of the wretched [ones], [and] that it first began to sweat on the right side. I was all afflicted with sorrow; I was afraid for the sight of that fair [one], I saw that eager beacon change clothings and color: at times it was drenched with wetness, soaked with [a] flow of sweat, [and] at times it was adorned with treasure. However, lying there [for] a long while, I beheld the sorrowful tree of the Savior, until I heard that it spoke; the best of woods began to say the words: 'That was years ago--I still remember that--that I was cut down at the edge of the forest, removed off my trunk. Strange enemies took me there, fashioned [me] there as a spectacle for them, commanded me to raise their criminals; warriors carried me there on [their] shoulders, until they set me on [a] hill; enemies enough fasted me there. I saw the Lord of mankind hasten with great zeal, [in] that he wished to mount on me. Then I dared not, over the word of the Lord, bow or burst there, when I saw the surfaces of the earth tremble. I could fell all enemies--however, I stood fast. Then a young warrior stripped him--[him] that was God almighty! Strong and resolute, he climbed on high gallows, courageous in sight of many, when he wished to redeem mankind.'

'I trembled when the warrior embraced me; however I dared not bow to the earth, fall to the surfaces of the ground, but I had to stand fast. I was erected a rood; I raised the powerful King, the Lord of heavens; I dared not bend myself. They pierced me with dark nails; the wounds were visible on me, open, malicious wounds; I dared not injure any of them. They reviled us both, together; I was all drenched with blood, covered from the sides of this man,  after he had sent forth his soul. I have experienced many of the cruel events on that hill: I saw the God of troops violently stretched out. Darkness had covered with clouds the corpse of the Ruler, [the] gleaming light'; shadows came forth, dark under the clouds. All creation wept, lamented the fall of the King: Christ was on [the] rood. However, hastening [ones] arrived there from afar, to the Prince; I beheld all that. I was grievous, afflicted with sorrows--however, I bowed down--humble, with much zeal--to the hands of the warriors. They took there God Almighty, raised him from the heavy torment; the warriors abandoned me, standing, covered in moisture; I was all wounded sorely with arrows. They laid [him] there, weary of limbs; they placed themselves at the head of his body; they beheld there the Lord of heavens, and he rested himself [for] a while there, weary after the great victory. Men began to build a sepulcher for him, in the sight of the slayer, they carved it from bright stone; they set thereon the Ruler of victories. Then [they] began to sing a song of sorrow, then, afterwards, they wished to travel, weary from the illustrious Prince; he rested there with a small troop. However, we stood weeping there, on the foundation, [for] a good while; the voice of the warriors cleared out; the corpse, the fair life-house, cooled. Then one began to fell us all, to the earth; that was a dreadful fate! One buried us in a deep pit; however, thanes of the Lord, friends, found [me] out, girded me with gold and silver.
