## The Dream of the Rood. Part 2 (78-121)

'Now you, the dear warrior of mine, might hear that I have endured the work of evildoers, of sore sorrows. The time has come that men over earth, far and wide, and all this illustrious creation, honor me, pray for themselves to this beacon. On me the Child of God suffered [for] a while; for this I, now glorious, tower under the heavens, and I may heal each of the ones--of those for whom exists the terror for me. Formerly I was turned [into] the hardest of torments, the most hateful to people, before [the moment] that I opened the fitting path of life for them, for the speech-bearers. What! Then the Prince of glory, the Guard of heaven's kingdom, exalted me over the forest wood; likewise he--the almighty God--thus honored his mother too, Mary herself, over all the gender of women, for all men.'

'Now I order you, the dear warrior of mine, that you say to men this vision; reveal with words that it is the beam of glory, that on which the almighty God suffered for many sins of mankind and the old deed of Adam; there he tasted death. Afterwards, however, the Lord rose with his much might, to [give] help to humans. He ascended then to the heavens. After [he] sets out hither, on this middle-earth, to seek mankind on doomsday, the Lord himself, the almighty God, and with his angels, [in] that he then desires to judge, he who has control of the doom for each of the ones, as he deserves for them earlier, here, in this transitory life. There may not be anyone unafraid for the word that the Ruler says: he asks for the many, where the man may be, he who would get a taste of bitter death as he did on the beam before. But then they fear, and think little [about] what they [may] begin to say to Christ. Then there [is] not any need [to] become terrified for those who always bear the best of beacons; but through the rood each soul who intends to dwell with the Ruler must seek the kingdom from [an] earthly path.'
